# Final Project: Applying the Bradley-Terry Framework to Soccer
### By Helen Chen, Carolyn Chen, and Nagaprasad Rudrapatna

In modern times, UEFA has been the focal point of club soccer as Europe is widely regarded as the home of the soccer's elite. For that reason, European soccer leagues are the focus of this case study. In particular, we consider matches from the Premier League (England) and La Liga (Spain). The objective of this project is to accurately predict the league table (ranking all teams at the end of the season based on accumulated points) based on the results of each match in a given season. Continuing our work from Lab 6, we have decided to use a Bradley-Terry modeling framework. Based on the framework (and particular use case of the National Basketball Association) presented in class, it is not immediately obvious how to model soccer fixture data since teams can tie. Unlike in international competitions like the World Cup, there is no extra time allotted (or penalty shootouts) to break the deadlock. In this project, we implement an extension of the basic Bradley-Terry model proposed by Davidson (1970). For the English Premier League, the top seven teams from our MM algorithm and the actual rankings line up perfectly. Moreover, two of the three teams that were relegated to the English Football League Championship were identified correctly. For the Spanish La Liga, the top six teams from our MM algorithm and the actual rankings line up perfectly (and the seventh-place and eighth-place teams are swapped due to tiebreaks), and the bottom three teams from our MM algorithm and the actual rankings line up perfectly.

### Instructions to Reproduce Results

1. Clone the GitHub repo (datasets included in the `data` folder). One dataset is on the Premier League in 2021-2022 and the other is on La Liga from 2018-2019. 
2. Render the `final-project.qmd` Quarto document. The code is a minorization-maximization (MM) algorithm that updates each element of $\alpha$ and $p$ 100 times. The outputs are tables that rank the teams in the Premier League and La Liga. The code displayed in the rendered document includes implementation details for the MM algorithm with Bradley-Terry for ties as well as the running of the algorithm for the Premier League data with varied $\alpha$ values. To view our code for (1) pre-processing the Premier League and La Liga data to calculate constant matrices, (2) running the algorithm over multiple $\alpha$ values for La Liga, and (3) creating tables for both sets of data, please view the `final-project.qmd` Quarto document.

Presentation slides can be viewed here: bit.ly/bayes-ic-soccer-fans
